---
title: Where'd the Pom Go?
subtitle: Coming back to and Sticking with the Pomodoro Technique
category: ramblings
promo_image_url: http://jamiewagner.s3.amazonaws.com/whered-the-pom-go.png
description: Coming back to and Sticking with the Pomodoro Technique
keywords: pomodoro technique, productivity
---
It's no surprise I'm a [fan](http://blog.sqwiggle.com/the-pomodoro-technique/) of the [Pomodoro
technique](http://pomodorotechnique.com/). Since I
discovered it a few years back, it’s helped my workflow and productivity
immensely. If you’re not familiar with it, here’s a quick rundown:

- Work undistracted for 25 mins
- At the end of the 25 mins, take a 5 minute break
- Every 4 Pomodoros, take a 20 minute break

I try to use it daily, but every now and again, I fall off the great
Pomodoro horse. Something comes up that has me knee deep in code and
those 25 mins just fly by. (No time for a break, more code!) Or I'll
start off great in the morning and a meeting will botch my flow. I'll
end up cranking until EOD non-stop to catch up. Wheels spinning.
Drained. Exhausted.  Once I get back in the Pomodoro saddle, I wonder
why I left? How do I not do this with everything I do? Bound and
determined to not break my Pom streak, here's some things I've been
doing to stay on track.

### Personal Distractions

Distractions through out the day are inevitable. Our computers, phones,
pads, watches are always buzzing, dinging, and singing the sweet song of
the Sirens. It's tough staying away, but I've found it easier knowing
that I can look, like or respond during my break time that'll be here
soon enough.

This tends to stave of the cravings for the most part, but sometimes
random thoughts will pop up that I don't want to forget. I've found it
useful to have a list or note open that I can dump these thoughts into
so I can reference them on my next break or off time. No need to
distract me now, or worry that I won't remember later, it's sitting in a
list for me to get to later.

### Work Distractions

Personal distractions aren't the only thing that will knock me off
track. Work distractions are just as bad if not worse: Slack, quick
video chats, the server is down, the site is on fire, etc.  For any
emergencies, I'll swap task context but keep the Poms rolling. I've also
found the breaks tend to be more important than ever for these
distractions. If fires are being put out, those five minutes help me to
step back, reassess and confirm the approach is solid.

I can't escape work distractions, but I can sure Pom my way through.

### Breaks

I've found breaks to be the most important part of this whole process.
At first they sounded like they would be more distracting than helpful.
How would I get anything done stopping that many times a day? But trust
me, those breaks are what's needed to fire on all cylinders for a
prolonged period of time.

But here's the deal, when it's break time, it's *really* break time.
Don't just start the break timer and work through it or skip it
completely. Get up. Walk around. Flip the record. Anything! Get your
eyes off the work task. I tend to check my favorite distractions, fill
up the coffee cup, or even get outside for a few minutes.

The long breaks have become a treat unto themselves. A full 20 minutes
that--if no emails or Slacks need a response--are all mine to do with
what I want. This is a good time to get in some internet'n or get
through some of the items on my distraction list.

Recently, I've started planning my long breaks for the day to help keep
them productive. So I'll read my 20 pages for the day or get some
writing in. I just make sure to get what I need to get done, done, so my
next 2 hour block will be as distraction free as it can be.

### Work Journal

I keep a Daily Work Journal in Evernote with a note for each day. At the
end of the day, I map out my plan for tomorrow. I'll list out the tasks
I'd like to get done for the day and then estimate the amount of Pom's I
think each one will take. Then when I start working, I'll list out what
I actually get done for the day and the amount of Pom's each one took.
I'll also make some notes for any bugs, unexpected meetings or tasks
that are dragging.

This has helped me to become aware of the amount of time tasks can take
and improved my future estimates. It also makes it easy to go back and
see what I did for a certain period. This is especially helpful during
those weeks when it just feels like my wheels are spinning and nothing
gets done. The work journal has proven otherwise.

### Tools

There are no shortage of Pomodoro timers and I've tried my fair share.
Here are the two I keep coming back to:

#### Pomodoro Time Pro
This has been my main workhorse recently. It has apps for just about
every device you've got (atleast on the Apple side of things) but I tend
to use the Mac version the most. It has the standard feature
set—customize Pom time, breaks and long break--but it also has the
ability to name the task that you're working on and maintain a todo
list. This has been pretty handy and could eventually replace my Work
Journal. It tracks Pom counts for the task selected and I'm able to
complete the task as well.  I can even create reports to see what days &
duration a specific task took. I've been very happy with it and continue
to use it as my main "work day" timer.

[App
Store](https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/pomodoro-time-pro-focus-timer/id961632517)

#### Pomodrone
When you just want to run a timer and get to work, it doesn't get more
simple and elegant than Pomodrone. Their design is the best of all the
Pom apps I've tried. It has the standard feature set as well, and they
give you a cute little quote and thumbs up when you complete the daily
Pom goal. They have very basic reporting of counts for the day, but
that's about it. The personality of this app is why I keep coming back.

[Website](http://www.pomodrone.com/)

### Give it a Shot
The Pomodoro Technique has changed my work life forever. When I fall off
the wagon, and come back, I wonder how I got anything done without it.
It does takes a little effort at first, but once I get in the Pom flow,
it becomes thoughtless to keep it up.

So whether you've tried it and quit or haven't tried it all, fire up a
timer and give it a shot. Let me know how it goes!

